---
layout: post
categories: [exercise]
number: 38
chili: 1
title: f Strings
---

## Exercise

Implement the same exercise as [Exercise 1]({% post_url 2014-01-29-01-character-input %}) (Create a program that asks the user to enter their name and their age. Print out a message addressed to them that tells them the year that they will turn 100 years old), except use f-strings instead of the `+` operator to print the resulting output message.

## Discussion

One very common operation programmers need to do is display information in the form of text output. In Python we use the `print()` function for this, but we need to keep one thing in mind: the `print()` function only takes strings. That means, when we want to display an integer, we need to convert it to a string before passing it to the `print()` function. When we have complicated numbers to display, this becomes burdensome.

Instead, there is a built-in Python functionality called [f-strings](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/inputoutput.html#formatted-string-literals), short for _formatted string literals_ that solve the problem for us!

### Variables

For me, the most common use of f-strings is to automatically display variables in a string. The mechanism to do this is:

1. Put the character "f" before the `"` from the string
2. Put the variable name (or expression) between `{ }` inside the string.

For example, the following code displays my favorite color in a sentence:

{% highlight python %}
>>> color = "orange"
>>> print(f"My favorite color is {color}.")
My favorite color is orange.
{% endhighlight %}

No need for concatenating strings with the `+` sign! Similarly for numbers:

{% highlight python %}
>>> number = 5
>>> print(f"The number is {number}")
The number is 5
{% endhighlight %}

There are all kinds of options for formatting decimals too - how many numbers after the decimal point, pad with zeroes, etc. that [the official documentation](https://docs.python.org/3/library/string.html#formatspec) goes into in great detail, [with examples](https://docs.python.org/3/library/string.html#format-examples), so I won't do that here. Note that the examples are shown with the "old" `.format()` way of string formatting in Python, but it applies to f-strings as well.

### Expressions

The really truly versatile thing that f-strings allow you to do is display _expressions_ and not just variables. In some cases this is very useful, mostly for readability:

{% highlight python %}
>>> print(f"2 + 2 = {2 + 2}")
2 + 2 = 4
{% endhighlight %}

Hopefully with f-strings, you have a more compact way of displaying information to the terminal!
