---
layout: post
title: A Python Wordle Clone
categories: [blog]
---

When learning how to program, I always recommend having a project or application in mind. For me, it makes it easier to concentrate and learn specific skills and flex the critical thinking muscle. What better project to attempt than the latest game craze, [Wordle](https://www.powerlanguage.co.uk/wordle/)? In this post-essay, I'll take you through the steps required to write your own version of Wordle on the command-line.

To make it even more fun (and of course, a tad embarassing for me), I screen-captured myself programming wordle, unedited, for those interested in watching.

<!--more-->

## Structure

This post-essay will take you through the steps and components required to program a Worldle clone in Python (on the command-line, without a GUI), and we'll use this as a use case for what is required to build a medium-sized project. Some parts will be quite boring (for example, planning and gathering requirements), but I hope to use this as a use case to showcase what kinds of work software developers do every day.

First, we'll go through the requirements of our project (the Wordle clone) and put them into a list. Next, we'll tackle each item one by one.

## Requirements

Before starting any programming project, it is important to make a list of all the features you want it to have. This accomplishes two things: (1) gives you a "stopping point" to know when you're done, and (2) lets you organize your thoughts to make sure your choices for how to implement cover all your use cases.

In our case, for a Python command-line clone of Wordle, here is our requirements and features list:

### Gameplay

* Game randomly selects a single 5-letter word from a word list to use as the "game word".
* The word length is taken from the game word, rather than being hard-coded at 5 letters.
* Command-line display asking player to enter guesses.
* All guesses should come from a word list. If the guess is not from the list, tell the player, and don't accept the word as part of the number of guesses.
* The player can enter words either in capital or lowercase.
* To quit the game early, the player should press CTRL-C.
* The game will keep track of how many guesses the player has done and display that at the end, either when the word is guessed or when the game is quit.

### Rules

* A guessed letter that is correct and in the correct place displays a `*`.
* A guessed letter that is correct but in the incorrect place displays a `-`.
* All other guessed letters are returned with a blank `_`.
* When the game word has two of the same letter, but the guessed word has one of that letter, it follows the rules for correct and incorrect placement.
* Correctly guessed letters in the correct place are displayed first.
* If the game word has one of a letter, but the guessed word has two, both in the wrong place, only the first letter in the guessed word is displayed as `-`.
* If the game word has one of a letter, but the guessed word has two, one in the correct place, the correct letter is displayed as `*` and the second copy of the letter is unmarked.

## Basic Design

For any command-line game, the basic program structure is a large infinite `while` loop that keeps "playing the game" until an end condition is met. According to our requirements list, the end conditions are:

1. The player guesses the word correctly.
2. The player exits by pressing CTRL-C.

So the first step is to structure our program with this basic scaffold (in a `__main__` block). First we tackle the first condition. We don't deal with selecting the word or processing guesses, so we create two dummy variables (`WORD` and `GUESS`), set them to specific strings, and continue adding on later.

{% highlight python %}
if __name__ == '__main__':
  WORD = "TESTS"
  while True:
    GUESS = "PHONE"
    if WORD == GUESS:
      print("You won!")
      break
{% endhighlight %}

Now we can add in the second end condition (exit on CTRL-C). This is slightly more complicated, since in Python the way to catch a CTRL-C press is through a `KeyboardInterrupt` exception, so we wrap the existing loop in a `try`/`catch` to catch the CTRL-C.

{% highlight python %}
if __name__ == '__main__':
  WORD = "TESTS"

  try:
    while True:
      GUESS = "PHONE"
      if WORD == GUESS:
        print("You won!")
        break
  except KeyboardInterrupt:
    print("You exited the game.")
{% endhighlight %}

Now that we have the structure of the main loop, we can add in the mechanics for player interaction, namely, taking player guesses.

## Player Guesses

